[MUSIC PLAYING]
The king cobra, a bite can
kill you within 30 minutes.
However, this same
substance has also
been developed into a drug
that can ease chronic pain,
that even the strongest
synthetic painkillers can't
touch.
And today, along with
venoms from an array
of other creatures, cobra
venom is showing great promise
in the fight against a
number of deadly diseases.
This is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
People have used
venoms as medicines
for thousands of years.
Chinese medicine,
Ayurveda, homeopathy,
and other traditional
systems of medicine
have all recognized
the potency of venoms
and used them to treat
pain, inflammation,
cardiovascular
disease, and more.
Western medicine got involved
in the early 1980s, when
the first venom-derived
drug, captopril, was
approved by the FDA for
use in hypertension.
Today, there's been a
resurgence of interest
amongst researchers and the
pharmaceutical industry owing
to advances in the study
of these compounds.
The most recent study, out of
Florida Atlantic University,
shows the potential
of cone snail venom
in treating severe malaria.
Glenn King, a professor
at the University
of Queensland in
Australia, has been
studying venom for decades.
He had this to say
about why venoms
can make such good medicine.
>> Venoms are a treasure trove
for biomedical exploration.
And the reason for that is
they're incredibly complex.
I mean, when I first
started working on venoms,
I thought that each
venom would probably
contain a few compounds.
But, in fact, they
contain hundreds
to thousands of molecules
in a single venom.
And some of these animals
are incredibly ancient,
if you want to think
about it this way.
They've been doing
medicinal chemistry
for a couple of million years.
They're a long way ahead of
us in terms of their knowledge
of how these molecules work.
>> How is it possible for
substances that can kill
to also heal?
>> Most of them are full
of hundreds or more small
peptides.
And what's interesting about
them is they're very potent.
They're highly selective.
Something that can
be lethal to a prey,
can actually be very
beneficial to you.
And the classic
example is a drug
that came out of one of these
venomous marine cone snails.
When the cone snail
envenomates a fish,
it's hits an ion channel that's
found of the neuromuscular
junctions of the fish.
And therefore, it
paralyzes the fish,
enables the cone snail to
reel it in and then eat it.
We have that same channel.
But in us, that
channel is not found
in our neuromuscular junctions.
It's found in our spinal cord.
And it's used to relay
pain messages to the brain.
So that same molecule in the
human is actually a painkiller.
It's analgesic molecule.
And that was approved by
the FDA some time ago.
And it's now used to
treat people who suffer
from intractable chronic pain.
>> There are now seven
FDA-approved drugs derived from
venomous animals, with many
more in clinical trials.
One such promising venom
comes from the honeybee.
Naturopathic doctor,
Donese Worden,
is particularly excited
by these recent studies.
>> For thousands of years,
humans have used honey,
propolis, and the venom from
these European honeybees,
that that particular type of
honeybee is being studied.
Now, it's not in
human studies yet.
But it is quite--
there are quite a
few studies being
done in laboratories that are
showing that they are rapidly
killing two types of our most
aggressive breast cancer cells.
And critically, is that
those venoms are leaving
the healthy cells unharmed.
So beautiful medicine
coming from nature.
>> Snakes are another source
of potent venom medicine
and potential treatments
for cardiovascular and other
diseases.
As is spider venom, which Dr.
Glenn King has been focusing on
in his lab.
>> So spiders for us having
been the most successful of all
the venomous animals
we looked at.
I think because
they are so complex.
Perhaps the most exciting
discovery we've made
recently is we found
a molecule from one
of those spiders
that's able to protect
the brain after a stroke.
That would be a breakthrough
in treatments today
because there are no
neuroprotective drugs
for stroke.
And the exciting
subsequent development
was that same molecule
protects the heart
from myocardial infarctions
after a heart attack.
>> This resurgence of interest
in venom is due to several
factors.
Dr. King explains.
>> We've got the molecular tools
that enable us to dissect out
these venoms from these
animals that produce very,
very tiny amounts of venom.
Now, there's just a
much greater diversity
of animals we can look at.
We've gone from snakes,
to literally hundreds
of different species we can
now look at, and dissect,
and determine whether
there's any molecules that
might be interesting.
>> So take it from
the dish to the mice.
I think it's time for
the human studies.
And I want to be on the
forefront of pushing that
forward.
>> While it may be some time
before the next FDA-approved
venom-derived drugs
are made available,
there is much in this
field to be excited about.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."